# Operating System Responsibilities

Since we just learned about the hardware architecture of computers, we should also think about the software systems that are managing the hardware.  These systems are known as Operating Systems (OS) (clever name, eh?).

<div class="embed"><iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/GjNp0bBrjmU?si=KaSF4M50kt9NHG5x" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

Let's explore what happens when we run a simple "Hello, World!" program. This example will  show how the OS manages the
resources and acts as the conductor as the program is executed.

When you execute the "Hello, World!" program, the first thing the OS does is allocate the necessary resources, such as
assigning memory for the program to reside in and determining the CPU time required for execution. This allocation is
crucial for the program to run smoothly, and the OS handles it efficiently, ensuring your program has a space in the RAM
and adequate processor time among the many tasks the computer is handling.

As the program starts running, the OS's task as a scheduler comes into play. Each processing core of the processor can
really only do one thing so this scheduling is particularly important in a multitasking environment where numerous
applications are vying for processor time. The OS balances these needs, allocating time slices to your program so it can
execute its instructions without hogging the CPU.

In parallel, the OS manages the memory allocated to your program. It ensures that the "Hello, World!" program utilizes
memory allocated only to it and that there's no overlap with other programs. This management includes allocating memory
when the program starts and reclaiming it once the program ends, thus preventing any memory leaks or clashes with other
applications.

As your program reaches the point of outputting "Hello, World!" to the console, the OS's role in input/output management
becomes evident. It acts as a mediator between your program and the hardware of your computer, especially the display.
The OS translates the program's output command into a form understandable by the display hardware, allowing the text
"Hello, World!" to appear on your screen.

Throughout this process, the OS also upholds its responsibility for security and access control. It ensures that your
program operates within its allocated resources and permissions.

Finally, if an error were to occur during the execution of the "Hello, World!" program, the OS's error detection and
handling mechanisms kick in. These mechanisms are designed to gracefully manage errors, such as terminating the program
if it becomes unresponsive, and then cleaning up to maintain system stability.

Through the lifecycle of running a "Hello, World!" program, the OS demonstrates its critical role in resource
management, task scheduling, memory management, input/output handling, security enforcement, and error management. Each
responsibility is interconnected, forming a cohesive and efficient system that underpins the functionality of our
computers. As we continue in this course, we'll delve deeper into each of these areas.

> ❓ **Test Your Knowledge**
>
> List and describe the major responsibilities of an operating system. Provide an example of each responsibility in action.

## Diving Deeper

We want to understand the *real details* of how computers operate, so a common theme in this course will be "diving
deeper".  Above was a general description of the major components of an operating system, but only in abstract terms. We
will reference the open textbook "Operating Systems: Three Easy Pieces" by Remzi Arpaci-Dusseau and Andrea
Arpaci-Dusseau throughout the term to get more deeply into the details.  

So, before moving to the next section, please [click on this link and read *Chapter 2: Introduction to Operating Systems*](https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/intro.pdf).  
